---
layout: post
title:  "My Reflection on my First Year at UW and CSE Admissions"
date:   2018-07-20
excerpt: "I finished my first year of college. "
tag:
- CSE
- The University of Washington
comments: true
---
Let me preface my bitterness by saying that I somewhat have a superiority complex. I get good grades and do it with relative little stress. Sometimes I look down on others because they struggle to do tasks that I think are simple. Yet, arrogance is a trait present only in those that feel the need to feel superior, and that need stems from insecurity. So let me conclude my preface by saying this: superiority complex comes hand-in-hand with an inferiority complex and, thus, I am both arrogant and critical of myself.

Many of my friends are highly accomplished individuals – some attend Ivy leagues or prestigious schools on the East coast, participate in research or internships during the summer, and are overall well-rounded scholars. Being friends with these people, I often feel left behind, “merely” attending a school of the UW’s caliber and having little-to-no extracurriculars to match up with my peers. As a result, I compensate by pouring in a praiseworthy amount of effort to maintain a good GPA, and I can proudly say that my grades reflect my effort, and vice versa. Yet, grades can only reflect so much of your intellect, and a person is defined much more by what he/she does outside of school than inside the strict realm of academia. Talented individuals are talented because they put in a lot of effort to pursue their passions, but effort is meaningless unless it is applied in a smart and efficient way. 

Let me contextualize my rambling a bit: a few hours ago, I submitted my application to the CS department and am extremely nervous about the outcome. Results are expected to come back in about three weeks (if last year is any indication to go off of) and I cannot help but feel that I did not do enough to make myself stand out. As I have said, arrogance stems from the need to reassure oneself, so let me brag a bit: I finished my first year of college with a 3.94 GPA and will be a teaching assistant for the introductory CSE courses this upcoming school year. Many will look at that and say I have the GPA and the pedigree to be a shoe-in for the department. However, I know it would be naïve of me to assume the same given that I know my own limitations better than anyone else. I lack any sort of self-drive outside school and have (sort of) idly spent my time indulging myself in a variety of pastimes including sports and anime. I do not regret my actions because there is no point in dwelling on the past, but I do rue my lack of skill and knowledge in a discipline that I plan on continuing throughout my adult life (just to be clear, I do understand that those two are interrelated, but I don’t have a better way to phrase it). 

Now, back to the fact that I turned in my CS application. For me, turning in my application was something that I have worked towards and built up for the whole year. Perhaps you have a similar experience, whether it be attending high school graduation or competing in a tournament final. Those are the moments where you reflect on yourself and think back on how you have matured as an individual. To be quite frank, I’m not quite sure how I have matured, and I wish I kept a diary back then as well. Maybe the fact that I am now writing a diary is the extent to which I have matured, and if that is the case, I am totally okay with that. But there is one thing I am totally sure of, and it is that enough is never enough. If you had told me at the beginning of the school year that I would be applying to the CS department with an extremely competitive GPA and a position as a teaching assistant, I would have rejoiced and told you that my first year at the UW was a success. Yet, now that I have those accolades at the palm of my hand, I cannot help but think of my failures and my inability to maximize my potential. 

One of my friends, someone two years older than me and a person I see as a role model, often tells me that we should never sit pretty on our laurels. Aiming for average is a pathway to mediocracy, and, personally speaking, I hate being normal. Though I usually keep it to myself, I can be pretty competitive, and I always want to be better than the person next to me. Right now, my wall of mediocracy is failure to get into the CS department. Of course, there’s nothing wrong with being one of the 70% of students who get rejected from the department, and I understand that there are other ways to remain engaged in the discipline without majoring in it. But as someone who’s goal is to climb over that wall, a rejection would be a bitter defeat, and one that I’m not quite sure I will be able to swallow. If I get rejected, I will, without a doubt, defiantly scream that I’m better than a “Thank you for applying” email, calm down, and apply again.

Setbacks are a part of life, and no one is an exception to this rule. To be sure, nobody likes setbacks. We often build up ideal images and set expectations for ourselves, and when we cannot fulfill them,  we are often left ashamed and embarrassed. Failure is something you try to keep as hidden as possible, and I, for one, do not want others learning about my inabilities. Setbacks, however, are not final. They do not define who you are. As cliché as it may sound, it is how you respond to the setback, and how you progress from there, that defines the person you are. As long as you pour in effort and remain engaged in what you do, you will always end up somewhere, even if that somewhere is not your ultimate goal. To put it in statistical terms, I’d like to believe that you’ll end up within one standard deviation of what your goal (Mean? Median? Mode? :p) is. 

To conclude my word vomit, I want to say that failure is embarrassing. It makes you want to dig a hole and bury yourself and let insanity consume you so you can forget the night and forget what you are ashamed of. I would like to do so as well. But, at the same time, that’s not who I want to become, and that’s not how I want to define myself. The important thing now is to remember who you are and don’t let go of what you’ve done. There is no future for those who deny their past. Keep on going through the motions. Act out the steps. Push through the shame. And one day, you will be what you are becoming.
